
(1) THE RED CROSS
History: founded by Henry Dumant in the 1860s, a Swiss volunteer, after his experience organizing aid teams in the aftermath of the Battle of Solferino. The Canadian Red Cross was founded by George Sterling Ryerson and became a full national society in 1927.
Fundamental principles: 
	humanity: serve people, not systems
	impartiality: care for everyone in need (both victims and aggressors)
	neutrality: don't take sides in a conflict (but do go in to help)
	independence: attend to needs of people, but not governments/rulers
	voluntary service: not for personal gain
	unity: combine talents to effectively help others
	universality: respect nations, but work across borders
Legally recognized symbols: red cross, red crescent, red crystal (diamond). Only Red Cross workers and armed forces medical personnel are allowed to use these symbols; misuse should be reported to a Red Cross branch.
Mission: to improve the lives of vulnerable people
Vision: voluntary aid
Size: Canadian Red Cross has >25000 volunteers
Services: disaster management, international operations, respect education (healthy relationships), community health and wellness programs, water safety training, first aid programs


(2) RESPONDING TO EMERGENCIES
Be prepared for emergencies. Some general tips:
	Keep a first-aid kit at home, vehicle, and workplace (if they don't have one), including copies of medical history and current medication
	Remember the location of nearby kits, AED devices, and other safety equipment in your workplace
	Record emergency contacts (e.g. 911, doctor, family members, poison control) in your contacts and near your phone. Put "ICE" (in case of emergency) in front of your main contact.
	Prepare a grab-to-go kit in case you need to leave quickly (due to fire, stalker, etc.) with supplies, documents, and an emergency plan. If you live in a disaster-prone area, prepare a 72-hour kit too. 
	People with severe medical conditions may want to wear medical ID bracelets/jewelery or prepare an ID lock screen on their phone

Identifying emergencies: emergencies can be subtle! Identify unusual/changed sounds, sights, odours, and behaviours. Use training and common sense to identify the nature of the emergency.

Common fears:
Bystander effect: take some role (e.g. provide aid, call 911, crowd control). Direct other bystanders directly. If you are unsure of how to help, ask!
Unpleasant injuries/appearance: take a breath and steel yourself! Or, you can still take indirect roles.
Catching disease: Wear PPE and disinfect afterwards. CPR, you'll have to deal with it. 
May make things worse: provide the level of aid you are trained to, and if you are unsure ask emergency services for directions. 
REMEMBER: PROVIDING ASSISSTANCE IN A MEDICAL EMERGENCY IS YOUR DUTY!
You are protected by Good Samaritan laws so long as you act prudently and without gross negligence:
	Move a person only if their life is in danger
	Ask a responsive person (or parent/guardian/caregiver of a child) for permission to help beforehand if present. 
	Check a person for life-threatening conditions before giving further care. (Ask responsive persons and emergency contacts and read medical ID for medical allergies and the like.)
	Call EMS/911 if necessary. (ALWAYS call if the person is unresponsive!)
	Continue to give care until higher-trained personnel take over
	Do NOT abandon the scene until EMS have taken over!

Obtaining consent: Provide your name, say you are here to help, and ask permission. You have implied consent where a person is confused or unresponsive or if a baby or child is alone.
Note: if the person or parent/guardian/caregiver of a child refuses care or withdraws consent at any time, DO NOT CONTINUE WITH CARE. If you believe the emergency is life-threatening, call 911 and explain the situation, then remain at the scene. If the person doesn't speak your language, try to communicate in simple language and/or gestures, or try to find a translator (e.g. present family) or ask if the 911 dispatcher can find one. Don't put yourself in extreme danger: you also have a duty to protect yourself.

If a young person (<16) reports abuse or neglect or you otherwise have reasonable grounds for suspicion, you are legally obligated to report it (in Ontario to a children's aid society, or if urgent the police). You may also report for 16-17 yo's.

Chain of survival behaviours: prevent and prepare, early identification, first aid/call for assistance, self recovery/early medical care

Reducing risk of infection: wash hands, wear (and properly remove) disposable gloves, wear other PPE, check for contamination after removing PPE, and sanitize PPE and touched surfaces with cleaning solution (e.g. 15mL bleach to 1L water). Follow Exposure Control Plan at your workplace if one exists.

After an emergency: it is normal to feel mental distress. If you feel that mental health symptoms impair your functioning more than 2 weeks after an emergency, consider seeking help.


(3) CHECK, CALL, CARE
PRIMARY ASSESSMENT
Check: check the environment and the person to check for hazards and nature of emergency. Check responsiveness (person reacts to your presence or being tapped on shoulder). If person is unresponsive, perform a head-tilt/chin-lift to open airway and check breathing 5-10 secs (if person is not vocalizing). Finally, check for severe bleeding.
Call: in most cases, call 911 before starting care. If there is an IMMEDIATE life-threatening condition (e.g. choking, severe bleeding, anaphylactic shock), try to open the line while you provide care or get a bystander to call, else call ASAP. For an unresponsive child who stopped breathing, provide 2mins/5 cycles CPR first due to lower oxygen reserves; for an adult call first.
Care: provide continual care to keep up vital signs and morale. Have the person rest, maintain their body temperature, monitor condition (including ABCs - airway, breathing, circulation), and give comfort and reassurance. Safely roll unresponsive persons into the RECOVERY POSITION - onto their side - and check ABCs. This makes blocking the airway harder.
Help provide medication only if it is safe to do so and the person is responsive and has expressed a need (verbal or nonverbal) for help finding, preparing, and/or taking medication. If possible, listen to the instructions of the first aider or observe gestures and let the person take the medication themselves. Only administer lifesaving medication (Ventolin inhaler/epinephrine) yourself if the person is unable, and never forcibly administer ingestible medication, as this is a choking hazard.

SECONDARY ASSESSMENT, after immediate life-threatening conditions have been taken care of
Check: ask SAMPLE questions of person or bystanders to inform further care: Signs and symptoms, Allergies, Medications, Past medical history, Last oral intake (food/drink and time), Events leading up to emergency. Check level of responsiveness, type of breathing, and skin (wet/dry, colour, temperature). Also perform a more careful injury check: focused examination at person-identified areas of concern if responsive or hands-on check from the head down if unresponsive.
Then move onto call and care as appropriate.

Notes for hands-on checks: indentify bumps, soft spots, or bleeding and additional factors:
	head, neck, and shoulders
	chest: both sides should move the same when breathing in/out
	abdomen: press softly and check for pain or hardness
	arms and legs

Note on shock: SHOCK is a severe reduction in blood circulation that can be caused by most severe injuries and life-threatening conditions. This is life-threatening because it cuts off oxygen to organs and affects responsiveness. Tell EMS/911 if shock occurs, and do your best to address potential causes of shock and provide continuing care. 
Signs include: anxiety or confusion, cool/clammy/paler skin, weakness, excessive thirst, rapid breating, drowsiness or loss of responsiveness, nausea and vomiting

Note on checking for hazards: always check for hazards first, from the environment and nature of emergency. Make the environment safe by removing hazards before providing care. If an environmental hazard persists (e.g. poisonous or oxygen-displacing gas), it may not safe to stay and provide aid. Save yourself, warn others away from the area, and wait for properly equipped rescuers to arrive!


(4) Choking
Partial vs complete choking
Small children will choke on damn near anything, especially hard/sticky/rubbery things. (A child's airway is smaller than you think!) Supervise and tell them to eat slowly and chew properly.
Partial choking is not immediately life-threatening as the person can still breathe. Call 911 if not cleared or gets worse. No need to intervene directly, encourage person to cough forcefully in an upright position. If cleared by coughing, the person should be monitored for several hours in case of bleeding/swelling in the airway.
Complete choking: inability to speak, cough, or breathe. Also indicated by high-pitched squeaking noises and flushed (red) skin that turns bluish or paler. This is life-threatening, so provide aid immediately, and have yourself or someone else call 911 ASAP and get an AED (if available) in case the person becomes unresponsive. If the person becomes unresponsive, begin CPR after calling 911. 
To clear complete choking, alternate between any two of the three methods: back blows, abdominal thrusts, chest thrusts. (Provide 5 each, with increasing intensity if it doesn't work initially; back-abdominal is most commonly effective.) For a baby, do back blows (hold face down, head lower) and chest compressions (hold and press with 2 fingers at least 1/3 chest depth). Afterwards, the person should seek medical attention to deal with any possible injuries and bleeding/swelling in the airway.
(Remember to ask if you can help first if the person is responsive! Always need consent.)
If you yourself are choking, call 911 (dead line indicates you need assistance) and turn on speakerphone, if people are nearby move someplace you can be noticed, and perform abdominal thrusts against a safe object with no sharp edges or corners (esp. furniture)

(5) Circulation Emergencies

Aggravating factor: cardiovascular disease (anything that causes the arteries to contract and harden). In general, risk can be lowered by not smoking, controlling LDL cholesterol intake, controlling high blood pressure, keeping a healthy weight, and managing stress.

HEART ATTACK: blockage of coronary artery starves heart of circulation. Most characteristic symptom is pain/pressure/tightness/heaviness in chest, and pain radiating to arms/shoulder/jaw/neck. Other symptoms include shortness of breath, sweating, dizziness, and unresponsiveness.
Call 911, then have the person rest quietly and chew acetylsalicylic acid tablets (1 adult dose, 2 Aspirin or other low dose) to reduce further clotting. Denial of heart attack is common and should not discourage provision of aid.

ANGIA: heart needs more oxygen than can be provided. Usually requires combination of cardiovascular disease and high stress or physical activity. Main symptom is painful squeezing/suffocating/burning feeling in chest. Indistinguishable from heart attack, so treat as one. Pain relief provided by nitroglycerin medication.

Note: make sure person does not have contraindication to ASA, and has not taken erectile dysfunction medication in the past 48 hours for nitroglycerin.

STROKE: blood flow to part of brain interrupted, causing permanent brain damage if not treated quickly. May be caused by ruptured aneurysm (hemmoragic stroke), blood clot (ischemic stroke), or brain tumor. Call 911 immediately and get an AED! Have the person rest and note when symptoms started or when the person was last known to be well. If using recovery position, roll onto good side.
Characteristic symptoms: facial/arm numbness or weakness, especially on one side, and difficulty speaking or understanding others. 
Symptoms include: severe headache, dizziness or confusion, unresponsiveness (may be temporary), loss of bladder or bowel control.
FAST: Face, Arm, Speech, Time.
TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACK (mini-stroke) is temporary (few minutes or hours). There is a subsequent high risk of stroke (5% within 48 hours, further 5% within 3 months). Call 911 anyways and check for brain damage at the hospital.

LIFE-THREATENING EXTERNAL BLEEDING: usually caused by rupture of artery or major vein
Signs: blood spurting or flowing freely from wound, not clotting, major blood loss
Have person rest and immediately control bleeding by applying firm, direct pressure to wound for as long as bleeding is uncontrolled. Meanwhile, apply a dressing with bandage; add dressings on top if blood soaks through. 
If bleeding in extremity cannot be reached or controlled by direct pressure or help is delayed, apply a tourniquet to restrict bloodflow upstream of the wound, 1 hand-width above the injury and at least 2 fingers above any joint. Tighten tourniquet until bleeding stops, then secure and document time of application. Improvise using long fabric and any rod to tie around.
You may delay calling 911 until bleeding is under control if you are unable to multitask.

LIFE-THREATENING INTERNAL BLEEDING: usually occurs after blunt force trauma
Signs: bruising and pain; soft tissues that are tender, swollen, or hard; blood in saliva or vomit; severe thirst, nausea, or vomiting; anxiety
Call 911 and get an AED, have the person rest quietly, and hope for the best...


(5) CPR (Cardiopulmonary resuscitation) and AED (automated external defibrillator)

CPR: maintains circulation while person is unresponsive and not breathing. Delays permanent brain damage (normally 4-6 minutes after clinical death) and brain death (8-10 minutes). For an adult, call 911 first. For a child or baby, perform 5 cycles (2 mins) before calling due to smaller oxygen reserve.
Do sets of 30 chest compressions and 2 rescue breaths. Continue until you are too tired, EMS takes over, or the person recovers.
Chest compressions in center of chest: for adult and child, use 2 hands; for baby use 2 fingers. Push deeply and steadily using your body weight and let chest recoil. Compression depth: at least 5 cm for adult and 1/3 chest rise for child and baby. Do at 100-120 bpm. (Music in head is a good metronome.)
Breaths: open airway (head-tilt/chin-lift on first time--for a baby not too far!), apply barrier device (or if none available do lips seal), and give just enough air for chest to start rising. Continue if both rescue breaths go in. If not, try clearing the airway again, then look for objects in the way (gently sweep out with fingers) after each set of compressions.
Compression-only CPR is acceptable if you're unable or unwilling to give rescue breaths. Note that if the person is in cardiac arrest due to a respiratory problem, rescue breaths are very important to restore oxygen.
Note: not tilting the head back and giving too much breath may result in air entering the stomach then aspiration of vomit. If the person vomits, turn them on their side, quickly wipe the mouth clean, then reposition and continue.
Note: for pregnant women, propping up the right hip 7.5cm to 10cm (using a soft object) helps blood return to the heart, but do not delay or interrupt CPR to search for an object.

AED: restarts the heart and corrects dysrythmia by applying a shock. Apply an AED to an unresponsive person (adult, child, or baby >30 days) ASAP during CPR.
Open and turn on the AED, clear clothes and place pads at least 2.5 cm apart on skin (ideally on chest, else 1 on back), then follow automated prompts to deliver a shock (while no-one is touching). Continue with CPR.
Note: remove any clothing, jewellery, and medical patches; place pads at least 2.5 cm from a pacemaker; and dry skin if wet. You may use an AED on ice or snow.
Note: some AEDs have a special child/baby mode for under 25 kg. This is probably more effective, but it's still safe to use a normal AED and adult pads on a child of baby.


(6) OPIOID POISONING AND NALOXONE
Opioid: drug that interacts with opioid receptors in the brain to create pain relief
Stigma around use--it's most productive not to judge and provide support. (And friendship, if you're feeling it.)
Opioids are Central Nervous System depressants. Overdose (and activating too many opioid receptors) causes opioid poisoning, eventually leading to respiratory and cardiac arrest.
Signs: slowed (or no) breathing, chest tightness, extreme drowsiness or unresponsiveness, small pupils. Check for discarded bottles and needles
Can be countered by naloxone (nasal spray or intramuscular injection). Kits are distributed for free--check pharmacies, public health units, charities, and UBC!
Call 911 immediately and get an AED and naloxone if available. There is legal protection for both the victim and anyone helping at the scene!
If person is responsive and breathing normally, roll into recovery position and monitor ABCs. 
If person is unresponsive and breathing normally, administer naloxone. If not breathing normally, provide 5 cycles (2 mins) CPR before administering naloxone, then continue CPR.
Naloxone normally acts witin 3-8 minutes. You may readminister every 3-5 minutes if there is no improvement.

(7) BREATHING EMERGENCIES
Respiratory distress, respiratory arrest
Act immediately! If breathing stops (respiratory arrest), the heart will stop beating! Brain damage follows 4-6 minutes after, and brain death in 8-10 minutes without CPR to sustain circulation.

Respiratory distress: 
Signs: shortness of breath; abnormal breathing (speed and/or depth); cool, moist or discoloured skin, fear, dizziness/light-headedness
Call 911 immediately. Offer to help administer medication if applicable. Encourage to sit down in a comfortable position (leaning forwards makes breathing easier). Provide reassurance to reduce anxiety.

Hyperventilation: breathing too quickly (and possibly shallowly). Upsets balance of O2/CO2 in blood.
Encourage person to take controlled breaths (box breathing: in-hold-out)
If hyperventilation doesn't stop after a few mins (or there is a suspected serious underlying injury or illness), call 911 and get an AED. 

Asthma: rapid inflammation of airway triggered by irritants, large temperature fluctiations, physical activity, or stress/anxiety. Constriction of bronchioles especially restricts breathing, especially breathing out.
In case of attack, if necessary offer to help administer quick-relief medication (bronchiodilator in inhaler form). Eliminate triggers, move to a comfortable place, and provide reassurance. Call 911 in case of difficulty breathing or no improvement.

Allergic reaction: inflammation may affect airway
Calm and reassure, identify and remove allergen, offer to help administer medication if applicable
Call 911 in case of severe reaction or struggling to breathe
Offer to help administer epinephrine in case of anaphylactic shock. (Autoinjector: remove safety cap, jab tip into outer thigh, hold 5-10 seconds or as directed, rub injection site 30 seconds. Repeat dose in OTHER leg if no improvement after 5 mins.)