(9) WOUND CARE

Skin anatomy: epidermis (superficial layer) is barrier and dermis (deep layer) contains nerves, sweat and oil glands, and blood vessels

OPEN WOUNDS (break skin) should be covered with a dressing, which is then held in place by a bandage. Triangular dressings can be folded down into a bandage. 
Apply new dressing on top of soaked dressings
Don't choke off circulation when applying a bandage

Open wounds: cuts, scrapes, and punctures
Care for small wounds: apply direct pressure until bleeding stops, rinse 5 mins, apply antibiotic ointment/cream and bandage, watch for infection
Call 911 if the injury is serious (including any puncture). Get an AED for life-threatening external bleeding and large punctures.

Splinter (object in skin): if object exposed, gently remove with tweezers and treat as cut; else seek medical attention. 

Impalement (object stuck in lower tissue): leave object in place and stabilize with bulky dressings without applying direct pressure on it, and secure dressings in place. Only remove if object prevents you from treating a life-threatening condition, otherwise there will be lots of bleeding (and possibly tearing of surrounding tissue)!

Partial amputation (object partially severed but still connected): put object back in place as best as possible and treat as open wound or fracture

Complete amputation (object completely severed): Call 911! Control stump bleeding by dressing and applying direct pressure. PROTECT object by wrapping in gauze or clean cloth, bag it and COOL it by placing on ice (but wrap bag to prevent freezing). Label container with person's name, date and time of amputation, and keep with person.

BURNS: soft tissue injuries caused by chemicals, electricity, heat, or radiation
Levels: superficial (epidermis), partial-thickness (to dermis), full-thickness (to underlying tissue)
Call 911 and get AED immediately if: burn causes difficulty breathing; caused by chemical/explosion/electricity (due to other possible effects); full-thickness or large area of blistered or broken skin; covers face, neck, hands, genitals, or large surface
Use discretion for superficial burns: call if in lots of pain or unresponsive
Note that burns to face may indicate burn to airway/lungs as well--monitor breathing
Thermal burns: cool area with water or clean, cool compress for at least 10 mins, remove jewelery or clothing on burn site (but not anything stuck to skin), cover loosely with dry, sterile dressing. When cooling large burns, monitor for hypothermia and prepare a blanket!
Chemical burns: put on PPE, remove clothes that might have chemical and brush off dry powders, THEN flush with cool running water for >15 mins, and refer to MSDS for further instructions
Electrical burns: turn off current, keep person still, look for entry and exit burns and treat as thermal. For serious burns, treat as head/spinal injury and get AED in case of cardiac arrest.
General precautions: leave blisters in place, don't use ointment on partial or full thickness burns, only use clean and sterile dressings (and not absorbent cotton)

BRUISE: blood and other fluids seep into surrounding tissue. Usually causes discoloured skin and swelling.
Apply cold pack wrapped in towel for up to 20 mins, remove for 20-30 mins. If pain is not reduced, repeat cycle.
Call 911 and get AED if person is in extreme pain or cannot move body part without pain, or if severe internal injury is suspected

Nosebleed: lean forwards and pinch bridge of nose. Call 911 if bleeding continues after 15 mins. Pay attention for other results of injury or medical condition.

Foreign object in nose: remove object if easily doable, else leave in place for EMS/hospital. Encourage person NOT to try removing themselves or blowing nose to clear!

Tooth knocked out: bite on clean dressing. Pick up tooth by crown (upper part) and keep protected: place in egg white, coconut water, or whole milk, or wrapped in gauze/clean cloth with person's saliva. Get person and tooth to a dentist ASAP!
Monitor for possible head/spinal injury.

EYE INJURY: from foreign objects or particles in eye, impact, radiation or burns, or chemicals or other caustic materials
Call 911 if impaled object in eye, out of socket, or exposed to chemical/caustic substance
Object in eye (not impaled): blink several times, gently flush eye with running water. If object not removed, seek medical attention.
Chemical in eye: flush >15 mins with running water
Flash burned: cover eyes with cool, wet cloth and get medical attention
While eyewash stations/bottles are preferred, improvise with any source of clean water if needed. Have the person remove contact lens if not stuck to eye after starting irrigation.

EAR INJURY: from impact to head, cuts or tears to ear, loud noises, blast injuries, or foreign object/substance in ear
Call 911 if blood or fluid is draining from ear canal, or if result of explosion or pressure injury. Treat external wounds normally. If object in ear can be easily removed and there is no head/neck/spinal injury, tilt head to affected side, gently tap ear to loosen object, and grab and pull object.

INFECTION OF WOUND: a complication possible with any wound! Localized or systemic.
Infection accompanied by nausea, fever, or general malaise indicate systemic infection.
Prevention: always wash hands before and after giving first aid, wear gloves when coming into contact with bodily fluids, keep immunizations up to date (especially tetanus), keep wound areas clean and wash regularly, and use sterile dressings, else the cleanest option. Change dressing and bandages if they become dirty or wet (after bleeding has stopped).
Google and watch for signs of infection: includes swelling, irritation, discoloured skin, etc.

Scalp injury: in secondary assessment, check thoroughly! If you are unsure how bad the injury is or if you feel a dip, soft area, or pieces of bone, call 911 and get an AED! Treat as head injury. Only apply direct pressure if there is life-threatening bleeding, else apply pressure around.

Crush injury: high pressure, especially if trapped between two objects. Call 911 and get an AED! Remove the object if affects breathing or is crushing head/neck/chest/abdomen, otherwise leave in place.

Chest injury: can result in trauma to organs and broken ribs, which may puncture skin or lungs. May also lead to pneumothorax and hemothorax (air/blood in chest), which can interfere with breathing.
Signs of penetrating chest injury: gasping or difficulty breathing, bleeding from open chest wound that may bubble, sicking sound coming from wound with each breath, coughing up blood
Call 911 and get an AED. Have person rest comfortably. Only apply direct pressure for life-threatening bleeding; for light bleeding do NOT apply pressure or dressing. Change dressings before they become saturated with blood, else they will prevent air from escaping and build pressure in the chest.
Signs of blunt chest injury: deformity or swelling, guarded shallow breathing, bruising
Call 911. Have person keep still and give bulky object (e.g. towel) to hold against chest.


(10) HEAD, NECK, AND SPINAL INJURIES
Head injuries can easily lead to impairments and brain damage, neck and spinal injuries to paralysis
Suspect head/neck/spinal injury in case of any incident involving blunt force trauma or severe wound to the head, neck/jaw, spine/back/torso, or whole body, as well as lightning or electrocution. Especially high falls, diving accidents, and car collisions.
If a pelvic injury is suspected also, do not put pressure on pelvis.
Physical signs include: severe pain/pressure in head/neck/back; blood or other fluids in ears or nose; unusual bumps/bruises/depressions; seizures; nausea or vomiting; unequal pupil size; partial or complete paralysis; loss of bladder or bowel control
Mental signs include: change in level of responsiveness/awareness/behaviour, weakness, tingling, or loss of sensation; dizziness and/or loss of balance
Check: if responsive, approach person from front so they don't turn their head, and ask to VERBALLY respond to questions without nodding or shaking head
Call 911 and get AED
Keep person as still as practicable until EMS arrive. If unresponsive or unable to support head, support with your own hands in position found. 
Move person carefully only to perform CPR or control life threatening bleeding, if scene becomes unsafe, EMS will not arrive for more than 45 mins (so you must transport yourself), person's airway is at risk (e.g. vomit), or if unresponsive moving into recovery position. Try to keep head/neck/spine in same position.
Even minor head trauma may result in concussion, which is generally marked by changes in alertness and behaviour, among other mental, physical, and emotional symptoms, similar to other head injuries. Advise person to stop activity ASAP and seek medical attention to prevent worsening of condition and permanent damage, or call 911 if symptoms are severe.

(11) BONE, MUSCLE, AND JOINT INJURIES
Sprain: stretched/torn/damaged ligament
Strain: stretched/torn/damaged muscle or tendon. Can result from repetitive action as well as overexertion.
Dislocation: bones dislocated at joint. Usually involves tearing of ligament.
Fracture: break, chip, or crack in bone. Open/compound or closed.

Causes: falls, awkward/sudden movements, direct blows, repetitive actions or forces. Osteoperosis increases ease of fracture. Stretch before exercising and don't overexert!

Call 911 if there are injuries to thigh bone or pelvis, area below (or at) injury is numb/pale/blue/cold, broken bone protrudes through skin, cannot safely move person, or by discretion.
RICE method of treatment: Rest, Immobilize, Cool (20 mins/hour), Elevate (if not increasing pain). Provide reassurance and keep comfortable.
If open fracture, stop bleeding first. Wrap ice and cold packs in a thin, dry towel and do not rub. Do not attempt to fix or relieve a dislocation yourself--leave it to the professionals to avoid damage.
Immobilize means keep still. A sling or splint is only necessary if you have to move the person. For splints, immobilize part in position found with splint long enough to reach the joint above and below injury, remove jewellery below injury, and pad for comfort (e.g. with cloth or towel). Don't choke off circulation! Improvise splints using sticks, thick towels, and other somewhat stiff objects, and secure with bandages or similar. Apply sling with triangular bandage under arm tied over injured shoulder and around back (and tie side to secure elbow) and secure with bandage. Alternately, apply a tube sling over the opposite shoulder and secure.

(12) SUDDEN MEDICAL EMERGENCIES
Respond using common sense and prior training. 

Fainting: call 911 if person unresponsive for more than a few minutes, is pregnant, or medical history is unknown. Place in recovery position.

Diabetic emergency: high or low blood sugar, can result in change in responsiveness and behaviour; rapid breathing; cool, pale, sweaty skin; appearance of intoxication; and seizures. Providing sugar usually improves condition in 10 mins, if not call 911. Don't provide insulin. (Most cases are low blood sugar, but giving more sugar doesn't harm if high blood sugar. That's what 911 is for if condition doesn't improve. On the other hand, insulin with low blood sugar or overdose can mess things up really badly...)

Seizure: caused by epilepsy, audio-visual overstimulation, or various injuries, illnesses, or medical emergencies that may affect the brain and its functioning. Signs are involuntary muscle movements, drool or foaming at mouth, uncontrolled repetitive motions, and altered responsiveness. Call 911
Call 911 if medical history unknown, seizure lasts more than few minutes, several seizures in row, or unresponsive for longtime. (Also for febrile seizures--result of high fever in babies and children.) People who commonly have seizures may have a seizure treatment plan, which will say if a seizure is not normal.
Care: protect person from injury by moving objects and protecting head with soft object. Do not hold person down. Once seizure is over, roll into recovery position. Don't put something between their teeth, as risk of choking is much greater than biting tounge.

Mental health emergencies: wide range of symptoms.
Sudden emergency: provide reassurance, comfort, and support. Remove distractions and encourage person to sit down and listen--acknowledge feelings and emotions without judgement. Do not dismiss delusional beliefs right now--you probably won't convince them and it's better to leave to professionals. Then offer self-help strategies if immediately applicable (e.g. breathing exercises in anxiety attack), but use discretion otherwise. The best thing you can do first is to listen and acknowledge their feelings.
Note signs of suicide: expressing suicidal thoughts and comments about themselves (especially if consistent--though the urge to commit suicide may come and go quickly!), intent to die (especially with plan), and final wishes. Other signs may be suspiciously lightened mood in depression and donating/selling personal possessions.

Childbirth: if you can't drive to hospital in good time, call 911 and create a calm, sanitary environment until EMS arrive and provide reassurance. 
Immediate sign is usually contractions <2 mins apart, or the obvious (e.g. mother says so, need to push, baby crowning). Non-Red Cross advice says contractions <5 mins for an hour is the right time to go to the hospital--usually that still leaves plenty of time.
If you need to help give birth yourself:
-Create clean birthing area with clean blankets/towels under mother
-Support head of baby as it comes out
-Wipe fluids or mucus away from mouth or nose
-Check baby ABCs. Dry baby with clean cloth to stimulate crying and breathing
-Place baby directly on mother's chest and cover
-Let placenta and cord drop onto clean towel. Do not clamp, tie, or cut cord. Cord will close by itself in ~1 hour, and there's no harm to leaving it on until EMS arrives. In fact, cutting it immediately (<5 mins) will deprive the baby of iron.
-Record time of birth
-Apply gentle pressure to any bleeding tears

(13) ENVIRONMENTAL ILLNESSES
Change in body temperature from normal (~37 C) due to overwhelming of thermoregulation process controlled by hypothalamus.
Too hot: cooling by increasing skin blood flow (vasodilation) and sweating
Too cold: preventing heat loss by vasoconstriction, producing energy, and shivering
Remember methods of heat transfer when controlling temperature: conduction, convection (moving fluid), radiation, and evaporation
Smaller and weaker bodies (e.g. babies, children, elderly) are more vulnerable. Fat insulates so is bad for heat but helpful for cold.

Heat-related illnesses
Environmental, physical, and behavioural causes. Heat and humidity reduces cooling and physical exertion increases heat generation. 
In addition to heat transfer control, avoid/acclimatize to heat, limit exertion, and stay hydrated
Heat cramps: muscle contractions
Heat exhaustion: weakness and slowing of mental state with other symptoms. Call 911 in case of nausea, dizziness, anxiety, fainting, or vomiting.
Heat stroke: body starts to shut down, leading to weakening of vital signs and mental impairment including irritable behaviour, seizures, and coma. Signs include dry hot skin, rapid weak pulse, and rapid shallow breathing.
Do what is necessary to cool the person, including active cooling with water for heat exhaustion or stroke. To maintain evaporative cooling, do NOT dry the skin! If alert, provide cool, hydrating drink.

Cold-related illnesses
Poor insulation and cold/wet/windy is bad! 
Frostbite: skin or deeper tissue freezes. Can be superficial or deep. Expanding freezing water and ice crystals explodes/shreds cells, killing them. If a finger or toe goes numb or skin looks shiny and rosy, warm ASAP! Moisture on skin and lack of circulation makes worse.
Hypothermia: general reduction of body temperature, which can lead to slowing metabolism and shutting down of body. Is made worse by dehydration. Should always be suspected from cold water immersion (esp. <10 C, or higher for long period of time). This is how you get >95% fatality shipwrecks in the North Atlantic...

Address hypothermia first, as it is life-threatening
Mild hypothermia: impaired movement but alert. Apart from general heating (esp to upper trunk/core), handle gently, keep horizontal, and no standing/walking for 30 mins. May provide high-calorie food or drink.
Moderate hypothermia: impaired alertness but still responsive, shivering may stop. NO DRINK OR FOOD. No standing/walking. Call 911.
Severe hypothermia: unresponsive. Treat as moderate hypothermia. Monitor ABCs and start CPR if no breathing.
Active heating to trunk may be provided by warm water bottles, heating pads, electric blanket, or if not available, body heat. Warm bath or shower doesn't help. Fire, stove, or hot rocks is dangerous.

Frostbite care: 
-remove jewellery that may restrict bloodflow
-thaw if it won't freeze again
-warm with warm water or body heat 20-30 mins
-protect warmed skin with loose, dry dressings
-if possible, elevate thawed extremities above heart level
-rehydrate
-encourage seeking medical attention

Freezing of skin to metal objects: call 911 if can't safely detach. Do not pull or tug frozen body part! Pour warm water on surface/skin to melt, and gently release once skin begins to come free. Treat torn skin as open wound.


(14) POISONS
Harmful if inhaled, ingested, absorbed (through skin), or injected.
For suspected poisoning, find type of poison, quantity taken, and when it was taken. Look in environment for clues. Always protect yourself from poison--don't enter where toxic gases may still be and use barrier devices to avoid coming into contact with poison on skin or lips.
Call 911 and get AED if altered responsiveness or difficulty breathing, else poison control (Ontario Poison Centre: Toronto 416-813-5900 or general 1-800-268-9017). Where applicable, provide label info for specific advice, and if you go to the hospital bring the container/label or a sample.
Ingested poison: induce vomiting only if told to
Inhaled poision: move person to fresh air, but only enter if safe!
Absorbed poison: brush dry powder from skin, remove clothing covered in poison, and flush with running water >15 mins
Injected poison: wash puncture site with running water and keep person still 

COMMON POISONS AND HAZARDS
Carbon monoxide: prevents binding of oxygen to RBCs. Get to fresh air. If low-level, long-term exposure is suspected inside a home, address causes.
Poison ivy, poison sumac, and poison oak: creams/ointment and oral antihistamine can relieve itching and blistering. If rash is severe or on sensitive part (e.g. face or groin), seek medical attention.
Giant hogweek, wild parsnip: poison activated by UV exposure. Protect area from sunlight and seek medical attention. If poison gets into eyes, rinse >15mins. Call 911 if sap is on sensitive part (eyes/face/groin) or if difficulty breathing.
Drugs: identify drug for EMS treatment

Animal bites: seek medical attention if animal is stray or unknown or if you suspect rabies. Watch for infection. Call animal control if wild (outside habitat) or stray.
Insect stings: scrape embedded stinger away from skin (e.g. using gift card), place wrapped cold pack on affacted area, and watch for signs of allergic reaction/anaphylaxis.
Ticks: remove if hasn't started to bite. Else use tweezers to grasp by head and pull upward without twisting until tick releases. Seek medical attention if tick or mouthpart piece cannot be removed. Else wash area with clean water and watch for infection, fever, or rash (in which case seek medical attention). Check for Lyme disease.
	Where possible, save ticks in a sealable plastic bag or pill bottle for testing by public health lab (or bring to doctor). Store live in fridge up to 10 days, or dead in freezer.
	Take precautions before, while, and after walking in wooded areas to spot ticks on yourself, pets, clothing, and gear. Insect spray and drying clothes 1 hour on high will kill ticks.
Snake bites: avoid by backing away slowly to avoid aggravating. There are a few venemous snakes in Canada--call 911 and describe the snake to EMS when they arrive to identify species and necessary antivenom and treatment. Keep person still and bite level with heart. If on limb, remove jewelery or tight clothing. Wash wound with water and cover with clean, dry dressing. 
Venemous spider bite, usually black widow or brown recluse: call 911, rest quietly, keep bite elevated, and apply wrapped cold pack.
Nonvenemous spider bite: treat normally. Wash bite with water, apply antibiotic ointment, cover with adhesive bandage and apply wrapped cold pack.
Stings from marine life: call 911 if trouble breathing, stung on face or neck, or unknown cause. Flush injured area with vinegar >30 seconds, else baking soda + water paste 20 mins to neutralize venom. THEN remove pieces of animal using gloves or towel and immerse area in water as hot as tolerable for >20 mins or until pain is relieved (or use hot/cold pack). Seek medical attention and watch for infection. Note that neutralizing the poison should come first as body parts may release more venom is touched. 